hi everyone welcome to weekly insights I
recently attended a virtual conference
at Harvard where some of the world's top
researchers and clinicians on
pathological narcissism and NPD
presented their work by far the most
impactful presentation was given by Dr
Solon akar a psychiatrist and
psychoanalyst Dr actar is 78 years old
and has had a truly prolific career
having authored edited or co-authored
over 300 Publications
but what was most impressive about his
presentation wasn't his academic
knowledge but its unvarnished Humanity
he spoke about many of the themes
presented on this channel the tragedy of
pathological narcissism the anxiety the
pressure and the
fear most touching I think was his
characterization of the loneliness and
isolation that he sees in his
narcissistic patients an isolation that
stems from the pressure to be as he put
it
extraordinary this pressure is
ubiquitous in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and NPD it forms
the basis of grandio self-experience and
idealized fantasies of the self
individuals with these issues aren't
allowed to be ordinary because when they
were young being ordinary was associated
with shame some were punished by
disappointing or disapproving Caregivers
for failing to meet expectations
some were ignored or neglected some were
so highly praised for being
extraordinary that anything less felt
like loss of Love whatever the specific
situation The Lesson Learned was that
the self needs to be extraordinary to be
any kind of a self at all Dr actar
really spent a lot of time on this
concept viewing it as the center of
pathological
narcissism the neglect or punishment of
the child's authentic quote ordinary
self is the first tragedy the second
tragedy is what happens next many of
these individuals grow up to actually be
extraordinary in some respect they're
often smart talented good-look
charismatic or otherwise successful Dr
actar said being extraordinary is
actually a
tragedy no one wants to be around an
extraordinary Ary person they're
intimidated they might look up to them
Envy them or want something from them
but to be extraordinary is to be alone
no one invites you to the neighborhood
barbecue no one feels comfortable
letting down their guard now this was a
simple characterization but it's one
that resonates with my own experience as
a specialist in this area of practice
many of my patients feel isolated and
alone many long to feel included in the
ordinariness of everyday life to feel a
sense of
belonging but to do so would require
letting go of the pressure the need to
be
extraordinary and in pathological
narcissism and NPD that need isn't
typically limited to areas of life in
which the person excels rather the
individual's identity is typically fused
with the need to be continually
perceived and validated as extraordinary
and this need is mutually exclusive with
being accepted or included it requires
that the individual stand out as
different above or other than everyone
else that's what it means to be
extraordinary not just in a limited set
of skills or Endeavors but as an
identity there's a steep price to pay
the pursuit of extraordinariness in
pathological narcissism and NPD isn't a
goal that can be reached in enjoyed it's
an existential demand that must be
continually met in the absence of a
sense of intrinsic worth and belonging
there's often a need to continually
elicit proof of one's
extraordinariness moments of validation
don't last they have to be continually
recaptured before they slip away and
this brings us to the heart of today's
discussion why do individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD struggle
so profoundly with
ordinariness what is the idea of being
just a person just one among many feel
so
intolerable for many being ordinary
doesn't just feel undesirable it
actually feels
annihilating ordinary means
invisible
interchangeable and for those whose
early experiences left them feeling
unseen or dismissed or conditionally
loved or ordinariness feels like
non-existence the fantasy of being
extraordinary isn't merely about wanting
admiration or success it's motivated
existentially if the self was only ever
recognized or valued when it was
exceptional then Fading Into the
background is experienced not as a
neutral state but as a form of
annihilation of self and this is why
narcissistic grandiosity isn't just
about arrogance it's a protective
structure that's built to ensure that
the self remains visible and
significant essentially
intact as Dr actar so poignantly
described extraordinariness is also
profoundly lonely the very thing that
seems to promise acceptance of the self
actually prevents it being admired is
not the same as being loved being envied
is not the same as being understood and
yet for many people with NPD these are
are the closest substitutes available
the problem is that admiration envy and
idealization are all inherently
asymmetrical they create distance rather
than bridging it and this is why many of
my patients describe deep feelings of
isolation even when they're socially
successful they often feel that love is
conditional hinging on their continued
performance of
extraordinariness they long for the kind
of easy mutual connection that other
people seem to take for granted but that
connection requires a willingness to be
seen as ordinary and that's where the
real conflict
emerges letting go of the need to be
extraordinary may feel like a kind of
death healing requires mourning not just
for the idealized self-image but for all
the childhood wounds that made it
necessary in the first place and it
requires tolerating the possibility that
one might not be the special ideal
version of self that always seemed
necessary to be any kind of a self at
all the ideal self was always an
illusion and even if it weren't it could
never actually be loved it could be
admired or needed or envied or even
celebrated but it couldn't be accepted
because it can never be real and this is
where Healing Begins
not in the dismantling of every ambition
or the rejection of all exceptional
qualities but in the loosening of the
need to feel extraordinary in order to
feel real it's in discovering that one's
existence doesn't depend on standing
apart from other people but in allowing
oneself to stand with
them now it goes without saying that
this isn't a simple process if you
identify with some of the things that
I'm saying here try to be gentle and
patient with yourself those are good
skills to have and they're also great
practice at taking steps towards not
having to be
extraordinary okay so that's it for
today the weekly Insight series is a
benefit for paid subscribers to the
channel for now I'm making every even
numbered episode publicly available but
if you'd like to receive videos like
these on a weekly basis consider
becoming a paid member I appreciate your
support and it helps me to devote more
time to this channel until next time
take good care
[Music]